# Udacity Data Engineer Nanodegree Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

## How To Use
* Run create_tables.py using python to create database and associated tables.
* Run etl.py similarly to insert data in tables.

### Prerequisites
* Python3 environment setup
* PostgreSQL and dependencies
* Jupyter Notebook to access the notebooks in the repository

## Files In Repository
Data files are in JSON format and split in two parts:
* /data/song_data - artists and songs data
* /data/log_data - client usage logs

In addition to the data files, the project workspace includes six files:
* test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
* create_tables.py drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
* etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
* etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.
* sql_queries.py contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
* README.md provides discussion on your project.

## Schema
The schema for this database is a star schema. It has one fact table according to business requirement and mulptile dimension tables to build it up.

### Fact Table
* songplays: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
* users: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
* songs: song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
* artists: artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
* time: start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Purpose
This project provides a company called Sparkify a medium to analyze the data in regards to the service the provide and help them answer some importance business use cases like "What is the most trending song of the month?". This will also help them imporve the service they provide by observing customer behaviour.